In addition to the $800 compensation
for eight weeks of work, we were provided a
furnished apartment
and could eat all of our meals at no charge in the
campus dining hall Plus, any guests that we might
have could stay at the, any visitors we might have
could stay at the guest house, at the campus guest
house, and also eat as our guests
at the dining hall.
As Joe's date of expectancy arrived, everything
was in order. And on January 31, she gave birth to
our first child,
whom we quickly named Stephen Charles.
Selecting the first of those titles from the
biblical hero, And the second
from Joe's
very
generously kind stepfather, Charles Edgar
Davis.
Mother and dad quickly drove out to see their first
grandchild. and soon bought their first
air-conditioned car so that they could help us
move to our new college station address one month
after, about a month after Stephen's birth.
When that day came, Dad and I left Kerrville before
daylight
in the Ford Victoria
and drove to Houston
where he had left his pickup
and a little trailer that we had made into a quote
moving van by building a cover
on what had once been the bed and pickup truck
mounted onto a trailer rack. We rented a small
trailer and attached it to the pickup
and headed away from Houston
At about dark.
Near the 1st of September. Heavy rain fell on us all
the way to Houston to College Station. And it took
us more than 4 hours to make that drive.
By the time we approached our new. Home.
On the west side of Bryan at Cindy Lane, across
Carson Street from what was then the
International Shoe Factory, the rain had
stopped.
So he and I, wide awake with adrenaline, decided we
would go ahead and unpack and unload all the stuff.
By the time the new mother, grandmother, and child
arrived the next afternoon,
we had everything comparatively well organized,
since the volume
of material that Joe and I owned were
comparatively modest. A notable absence in our
furniture had been filled because Dad and I drove
down to East Main Street in Bryan and found at the
Craft Furniture Company a used vinyl-covered
dinette table and four plastic-coated chairs for
the sum of $29.95.
Paragraph. As the year began at Nagel Hall.
Once the home of civil engineering.
Located facing north on just South. Of the G
Raleigh white statue. And a short walk. Southeast
of the academic building. I was assigned to the
office of the full professor
who was on leave for the year.
That
large and comparatively large and
well-appointed office was indeed a blessing for a
novice and it was located immediately adjacent to
the office of the
dean again paragraph again one of life's
coincidences came into play because the new dean
of arts and science of the school of arts and
sciences for the agricultural mechanical
college of texas was dr frank w.r hubert
This is the same individual
who had permitted me to become a member of the
Bengal Lancers Boys Band as a seventh grader and
who was, Dash, by the time I was a high school
senior, the principal at Orange High School.
He had been selected by the new A&M president, Earl
Rutter,
to come to College Station because President
Rutter and a number of other deeply concerned
Aggies wanted to try to create a stronger
relationship between A&M
and the high school leadership across the state of
Texas.
Dr. Hubert, a comparatively thin, blonde,
and very articulate man, had grown up in Cameron,
Texas
and attended the University of Texas
His career had been impacted very positively. By
lecture start. From Orange. And also Doctor JW
Edgar.
The Superintendent of Schools in Orange during.
The war years and later. The state Superintendent
of Education.
who was one of the key recommenders of Dr. Hubert
for the A&M post.
As my duties began in the history department, I
learned that Dr. Nance was a
very stubbornly and unyieldingly leader of the
department.
A stubbornly and unyieldingly
determined leader of the department.
He expected everyone to meet every class on time,
to be dressed in a professional manner, and to be
available for students
in their offices during the normal eight to five
working hours.
Since I already had published two articles and a
little book, and had two other articles
forthcoming,
My arrival in the department had been greeted with
quiet approval.
During the first few days of the fall semester, I
noticed that a number of the group Walked over to
the Memorial Student Center for coffee at mid
morning.
I very much wanted to be included in that group. But
worried that it would might seem intrusive. If I
invited myself to join that.
Group. Thankfully. One morning, perhaps the
second or maybe the third week,
a new colleague opened my door and asked if I would
like to join them, and I almost jumped from my
chair.
Before many days of coffee, I learned that Dr.
Nance did not approve of there being a coffee pot in
Nagel Hall and did not want anyone to make coffee in
their own office because to him that was quote a
waste of time. On the other hand, since he led the
mid-morning and mid-afternoon walks to the MSC,
he obviously did not think there was any waste in
walking to the MSC.
Those conversations ranged over every subject in
the world, but quickly it became obvious that
there was comparative cohesion in the department
and that Dr. Nance was not the chairman guided by
the will of the majority
of the departmental faculty, but was in fact the
department head who made the decisions
that he thought were best for the department.
Early that fall, at a school of arts and sciences
faculty meeting, Dean Hubert spoke.
And I thought that I noticed in his manner at the of
the speech.
I thought I noticed in his demeanor
from the beginning through the end of the speech
was very carefully guarded And filled with.
Concern.
He walked back to his office alone. In front of a
number of us. And a few days later. He
stepped into. My office. And ask what the group had
thought about his remarks. When I told him that
there was overwhelming approval and
endorsement, he relaxed and indicated his deep
concern about being received
on the campus with acceptance and respect since he
had not had, since his career had not yet included
higher education faculty experience.
Another speech during the fall struck all of us in a
different manner as we went to hear the A&M
president, Earl Rutter.
His remarks
which he read very carefully, left all of us
shaking our heads with the
evaluation that he was not a very good speech maker
and did not seem to have a long experience in higher
education.
Further conversation indicated that President
Rutter, known to one and all of his friends as Earl
Rutter, had been born in the Texas Hill Country and
grown up in Eden.
After two years at what was then John Tarleton
Agricultural College, he transferred to A&M and
was a member of the class of 1931.
A group that included many, many outstanding
individuals. Including the then incumbent
longtime incumbent congressman. From the Brazos
County area, Olin E Tiger Teague Teague.
Mr Rudder. Had. After completing his studies at
A&M, met and married his wife, Margaret, from a
ranching family near Brady. And they had settled
where they settled, and he served as a high school
teacher, coach, in addition to managing the Mrs.
Rudder Ranch.
When World War Two came.
Mr Rudder had been called to active duty and served
with true distinction.
As an officer of the Army Rangers.
Most notably. Leading a Ranger. Battalion. up the
cliffs at Pointe du Hoc, P-O-I-N-T-E, D-U-H-O-C,
the night before D-Day, June 6, 1941.
In the fall of 1940, 1980,
when I happened When I had the honor of meeting
General Omar Bradley, commanding officer of all
field forces, all American field forces in
Western Europe in World War II, he looked up at me
and asked if I was from A&M.
positive response, he asked if I knew President
Rudder.
And I proudly.
Answered told him that I had worked. With Mr Rudder
on a number of points. As he continued, his voice
broke. When he said in 40 quote in 48 years of
command responsibility. I never gave a more awful
order to any officer than the one I gave Earl the
night before D-Day. Because if he and his men had
not succeeded in climbing that cliff almost 200
feet of sheer rocks and knocking out the German
artillery hidden behind 12 feet of concrete, that
overlooked both Omaha and Utah beaches. If they
hadn't succeeded, we would have had a massacre,
and the war might have turned out differently."
Period, quote.
But we faculty members' first impression of Mr.
Rutter was that he was not an important an
impressive speaker. Gradually, we realized that
he didn't expect speaking to be his mark of
distinction,
nor
did he worry about not having a PhD
and a long record of scholarly research. Instead,
he concentrated on leadership,
which had begun soon after his return to Brady when
a local group encouraged him to run for, to seek the
position as mayor of that hill country town
in 1946.
The manner in which he handled that task in some
fashion attracted the attention of Governor Alan
Shivers a few years later, who appointed him as the
interim land commissioner of Texas to clean up an
awful mess
in that office, which resulted in the
imprisonment of Mr. Rutter's predecessor,
Bascom Giles.
As I look at the highway sign, we have just passed
one that says, Welcome to Johnson City, the home of
Lyndon B. Johnson.
After Mr. Rutter did such a good job with the, in
straightening out the land office,
a group of individuals
deeply concerned about Texas A&M identified him
to, as the proper individual
to take over the presidency
of A&M and to lead the institution forward.
Their concern had been caused by more
than a decade of rapid turnover in the leadership
on the campus.
and the obvious lack of growth and progress there.
Other Texas institutions were beginning to grow
rapidly in enrollment and reputation, but A&M
seemed to be standing still. So they brought this
hill country
rancher and quiet politician to take over the
task.
Paragraph.
When we survivors of PhD programs had read his
resume,
we were not impressed because he didn't have a
graduate record, had never been a post-secondary
faculty member
and was without research or publications.
What we obviously overlooked was his leadership
ability. Gradually, we accepted the fact that he
identified himself as, quote, the pot-bellied
Prexy.
The latter part of which came from. His student
days when the chief executive officer.
Was identified in an area of Aggie nicknames as the
proxy. Even the big light bulb.
Which glowed above. the dome on the academic
building was known as Praxis Moon, a favorite
spring target for student sharpshooters.
Mr. Rudder
spent his time
in organizational leadership
and tireless work in behalf of the institution in
Austin and Washington and other key governmental
locations.
Meanwhile, in the history department,
we met classes. normally 50 to 50 or so per section
because in that era there were no, none of the large
sections of the introductory courses.
Dr. Nance expected us to turn in a copy of all of our
tests
And grades of all students were posted publicly,
including names, on our doors immediately after
we finished grading final exams.
That policy of review
discouraged anyone from having either a high
percentage of A's and B's or an unusually large
number of failing marks.
We all checked the roll
and soon learned that the department head would
back us in any disciplinary problem we might have.
Yet, those difficulties were almost
non-existent
because Aggie fish were all in class, seldom
without paying attention,
and in corps uniform day after day.
At the end of the first year, we were all evaluated,
and I was pleased to get a comparatively favorable
summation. But since that was the first year in the
state's biennial appropriation
period, there were no salary increases.
for anyone, including those
faculty members who were promoted for the coming
year.
My blessing, however, had come near
the beginning of the spring semester.
On that day, as I was picking up my mail in the
departmental office down at the end of the hallway
on the second floor of Nagel. Dr. Nance saw me and
invited me into his office
where he quickly
mentioned, quote, John Hill
Has just told me he's not coming back. He's staying
at the University of Houston. He's going to. He's
accepted a permanent position at the University
of Houston. So you can stay here.
And be a member of the department.
Period quote. That night, I joyfully informed Jo
of that good fortune, and she began to look for a
house the next day.
Within a few weeks, she found one at 410 Emerson, at
Bolton, B-O-L-T-O-N,
in College Station
east of the campus.
It was a pleasant little frame house, about 1,600
feet in size, with three bedrooms,
a small double car garage,
and enough room in the backyard for a garden.
We moved there about the 1st of May, 1960.
And began making payments.
And began our monthly payments.
Which started. Began making monthly payments,
which started at $85. We had paid only the minimum
down payment under the GI Bill
and soon decided that we would start saving all the
money we could for a, quote, dream house, which we
might build in some future year.
All around us in that pleasant setting, We're
faculty. Young faculty members with small
children. About like ourselves.
And it was a. Splendid it was in hindsight. A.
Glorious time.
Nothing needed to be locked. Uh, there was no.
Worry about breaking or entering.
Our street safety. Or any other problem.
I got to teach. Summer school. So that. our
finances seemed very positive.
Paragraph, meanwhile, I was continuing work on my
dissertation,
and that work came to a pleasant fruition
the second year at A&M.
As the time approached for the unyielding
deadline date for all dissertations to be
submitted by doctoral students who would
graduate in the spring,
I still lacked two chapters of my dissertation.
Painfully and. Carefully, I wrote Doctor
Vandiver letter. Telling him. My embarrassment.
At not having finished those two chapters.
I admitted my failure.
To him. and that I had let down my wife
and son and parents.
When he received that note, he called me and said
tersely, get down here as soon as you can. before he
hung up.
Frightened all the way, I drove to Houston, walked
into his office. He came in and said very simply,
get me those two chapters by the deadline in two
weeks, or don't bother ever sending them.
Needless to say, I came back
and tried to build up confidence and
determination.
The first chapter became a reality within about a
week.
And then early the next week, At supper time, I told
my bride that I would go back to the office and work
on that chapter. When she asked when I would be
home, I told her I did not know. Depend on how well I
did that chapter. I started typing and somewhere
about 2 o'clock in the morning completed it.
Returned home and slept with relief. and sent the
entire document to Dr. Vandiver,
later realizing that the last chapter may have
been about the best one that I had completed.
Thus, in the spring of 61,
that degree was officially completed,
And we proudly walked away from the quietly
traditional
commencement held on the east side of
the main building at Rice.
Back at A&M,
Dr. Nance had given me a second year of very
positive review, and my salary increased from
$550 to $700 a month.
Meantime, I realized that my colleagues in the
department were all
very capable men.
They took their teaching very seriously, were
deeply concerned about students, and were
helpful to each other.
There were no eccentricities in terms of
behavior,
dress,
or other events.
This team included some
notable personalities.
Dr. Nance himself was a tireless researcher in
Texas history.
particularly in the period of the Republic of
Texas, 1836,
and the decade following Texas independence in
1836. He
had been working on a detailed study of the Mier
expedition
already for years, and that would continue
literally up until his death, when it was
completed
with a manuscript of more than 2,000 pages
submitted for publication.
To his
students, his students had given him the nickname
Notes Nance. because of his classroom habit of
relying heavily upon his notes and reading a large
portion of his lectures from those pages.
Other memorable individuals were Screamin'
Al Nelson,
Never forgotten by anyone, this specialist in
Latin American history
would regularly yell at his classes,
particularly
as a result of his worry
About quote Democrats and other communist
liberals.
Quote who were going to ruin American democracy.
Until I had a class. Session a class that met across
the whole way from his. I did not understand why he
Why he merited that nickname. But after. Hearing
in those months. There was no doubt. About its
appropriateness.
The senior man in Southern history, my specialty.
Was Horace Bass.
Who seemed to his. Members of his classes to be
short. In humor. An understanding and thus. He was
red ass bass.
Not far away. Was
a. An Easterner.
Lloyd Taylor a graduate of Lehigh University who
impressed everyone with the his
splendid appearance and the style of his dress.
Among the first to wear button-down collars and
ties of real distinction he was always Ivy League
tailor
since it was history paragraph since the
department was history and government
The senior man in Texas government was Gene
Benton,
who required all students to take their exams in
blue books, then a standard practice at upscale
institutions.
So His pseudonym, so he earned the student
pseudonym of Blue Book Benton.
Others who quickly struck this new colleague by
their care, ability, and thoughtfulness were
Claude Hall, a University of Virginia product
who specialized in American diplomatic history.
Herbert Lang, a UT graduate in US diplomatic.
John Duncan, quietly, courteously,
and patiently
concerned to the students.
Another political science, another government
colleague whose nickname
seemed special was Jock Woods. who reportedly
was inclined not to fail anyone, any athlete in his
government classes.